
                           THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA HOLDEN AT KAMPALA

 COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION

HCT-00-CC-MA-0057-2007

(Arising from HCT-00-CC-CS-0062-2007)
                       Anglo Fabrics (Bolton) Limited
                                        Applicants
                                 Ahmed Zziwa

Versus

Mohamed Ssali
                      Respondent


BEFORE: THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE FMS EGONDA-NTENDE

RULING

This is an application for a temporary injunction to restrain the
respondent from removing a consignment of goods containing 964 cartons of
soap bearing the applicants' trademark 'MEKAKO' from the possession and /
or control of the Uganda Revenue Authority until the determination of the
head suit. In addition this application seeks an order to stop the
respondent from dealing in products bearing the trademark MEKAKO until the
determination of the main suit. And that the respondent should be liable to
pay to the Uganda Revenue Authority taxes, penalties and other dues
including demurrage arising from the retention of the goods in question.
The applicant further seeks that the costs of this application be provided
for. The application is supported by an affidavit of Ahmed Zziwa, applicant
no.2.
The application sets out 10 grounds upon which it is based. I shall not
repeat them as they just constitute a narrative of the facts upon which
this application relies. From what I can gather the applicants' application
is grounded on the fact that there are the registered trademark proprietors
of the trademark MEKAKO. It is asserted by the applicants that any dealing
in the goods bearing this trademark would inflict upon the applicants
irreparable harm as the goods in question will presented as the applicants'
goods whereas they are not.
 The respondent opposes this application and has filed an affidavit in
support of its position. The respondent accepts that he imported the said
goods into Uganda but that at the time he did so, the trademark of the
applicants, had expired.  Secondly that he has no intention of selling the
goods in Uganda as the goods are prohibited goods in Uganda, and he has now
applied for re-export of the same out of Uganda.
It is not in dispute that the applicants are the owners of the trademark
MEKAKO. This trademark registration expired on 10th September 2004, and was
subsequently renewed on 9th May 2006, purportedly from the 10th September
2004. The trademark is in respect of the class of goods that the respondent
has imported. Upon the oath of the respondent the goods in question bear
the trademark MEKAKO. Whether the goods are counterfeit or not is not a
question that can be settled on the affidavits before me and perhaps it is
not necessary to resolve the same at this stage.
What is important is for the applicant to establish a prima facie case that
there is a serious question to be investigated. Secondly that if the
temporary injunction is not granted the applicant may suffer irreparable
harm. And in case of doubt, the court can consider the balance of
convenience.
Mr. Fred Mpanga, learned counsel for the applicant submits that the first
and second conditions have been satisfied for the grant of a temporary
injunction, relying on both the affidavit in support, and the affidavit of
the respondent which show that the goods in question bear the trademark
MEKAKO, to which only the applicants have rights.
Mr. Wycliffe Birungyi, learned counsel for the respondent, submitted that
the applicants had failed on all three prerequisites. At the time the goods
were imported the trademark was not registered. Registration was only
renewed in May 2006, and according to the law, it is only effective from
the date of renewal, in spite of what is contained on the certificate of
renewal. Secondly he submitted that the goods were prohibited goods in
Uganda by the East African Customs Management Act. The respondent had no
intention of selling them in Uganda, and had applied to re-export outside
Uganda. He submitted that this application ought to be dismissed.
At the outset it is important to observe that it is not possible, indeed
not desirable that the court at this stage engages in a discussion over the
merits and possible final outcome of the plaintiffs' claim. But the
plaintiff must be able to show that there is a serious question to be
tried. I am satisfied that he has done so. In spite of the lapse in
registration for a period the applicants are the registered proprietors of
the trademark. The goods in question bear this trademark or name by the
admission of the respondent. The goods in question are in this
jurisdiction.
In fact the respondent through an annexture to the affidavit in opposition,
addressed to the Executive Director of U.N.B.S. dated 23rd February 2004;
the respondent acknowledges having stocks of, among other things, thousands
of cartons of Mekako soap. This was well before the expiry of the
applicants' trademark.
The applicants seek a permanent injunction in the head suit, to restrain
the defendant from putting the goods in question on market here in Uganda,
where the goods are and the jurisdiction into which the goods were
imported. If this application fails, and the final suit succeeds, it is
likely the resultant order would be nugatory, as the applicant would have
suffered loss, that is more probable than not, irreparable and would not be
atoned for by way of damages.
The respondent counters this argument with his claim that the goods in
question are prohibited in Uganda, and he has no intention of selling the
same in Uganda. He desires to re-export them, presumably to another
jurisdiction. That may well be so, but the original intention was to sell
the same in Uganda. That is why the respondent is in the first place seized
of the goods in this jurisdiction. The goods, on the respondent's admission
bear the same name or trademark as the trademark of the applicant for the
same class of goods. Ordinarily the law would not allow him to deal in the
same goods bearing a trademark belonging to another. Whether the respondent
can deal with such goods by way of re-export is an issue that will be dealt
with at trial and not at this interlocutory stage. The status quo must be
preserved.
On a balance of convenience, I am inclined to grant the temporary
injunction sought by the applicant but on condition, that it will not last
more than six months from today. Parties are directed to proceed with
appropriate dispatch to trial of the head suit. Secondly the applicants
shall pay the costs of storage/retention of the said goods by Uganda
Revenue Authority, for the currency of this order, should the head suit
fail.
The costs of these proceedings shall abide the outcome of the head suit.

Signed, dated and delivered at Kampala this 5th day of April 2007



FMS Egonda-Ntende
Judge








PAGE


PAGE  4




