
         Nakendo v Mwondha (09/2007) [2008] UGSC 2 (22 January 2008)
 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF UGANGA

AT MENGO


(CORAM: ODOKI, C.J,. TSEKOOKO, MULENGA, KANYEIHAMBA
AND KATUREEBE, JJ.SC).


                   ELECTION PETITION APPEAL NO. 09 / 2007

BETWEEN

ABDUL BALINGIRA NAKENDO ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: APPELLANT

                                     AND

PATRICK MWONDHA :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: RESPONDENT

[An appeal from the decision of the Court of Appeal at Kampala (Mpagi
Bahigeine, Engwau and Byamugisha, JJ.A) dated 18th January, 2007 in
Election Petition Appeal No. 23 of 2006]


                         JUDGMENT OF KATUREEBE, JSC

This is a second appeal arising from an election petition filed in the High
Court by the Respondent. The High Court allowed the Petition. The appellant
unsuccessfully appealed to the Court of Appeal, hence this appeal. --

The facts of the case are as follows:-
The appellant and the respondent were among the six candidates who
contested for the Parliamentary seat of Bukooli North Constituency, Bugiri
District, during the Parliamentary Elections that were held on 23rd
February 2006. Article 80(1)( c) of the Constitution stipulates that a
person is qualified to be a member of Parliament if that person has
completed a minimum formal education of Advanced Level standard or its
equivalent which shall be established in a manner and at a time prescribed
by Parliament by law. The appellant had not attained A-Level standard. The
National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) which is by law the body
authorised to issue a certificate equivalent to A-level standard for the
purpose of the said election, issued the appellant with a "certificate of
completion of Formal Education of Advanced Level or its equivalent" With
that certificate the appellant was nominated and his nomination was
accepted by the Electoral Commission. He contested the election and was
subsequently declared winner of the election and duly elected Member of
Parliament for the said constituency.

The respondent thereafter petitioned the High Court, at Jinja, seeking the
nullification of the election of the appellant on grounds that the
appellant was not qualified for election as a member of Parliament due to
lack of academic qualifications notwithstanding the fact that he had been
issued with the "certificate of Advanced Level or its equivalent" by NCHE.
The NCHE and the Electoral Commission were cited as co-respondents in that
petition.

In his answer to the petition, the appellant maintained that he was duly
qualified for election and that he had been validly nominated for
participation in the elections. The NCHE asserted that it had carried out
the necessary consultations with the Uganda National Examinations Board
(UNEB) as well as the Uganda Police Training School, Kibuli, where the
appellant had undertaken a Police Course and training, and found his papers
authentic. Similarly the Electoral Commission denied any wrong doing,
maintaining that the appellant had been duly nominated and elected to
Parliament.

The learned trial Judge , in his judgment dated 25th October 2006, found
that the appellant's certificates were not authentic and held that the
appellant lacked the requisite academic qualifications and decided that he
was not qualified to be nominated for election as a member of Parliament.
The Court of Appeal upheld the decision, hence this appeal.

In this Court, the appellant filed 10 grounds of Appeal: These grounds are
set out in the body of this judgment in the order in which they were
argued.

In his written submissions, Mr. F. Mukasa, learned counsel for the
appellant, argued the grounds of appeal as follows: Grounds 4, 6 and 7 were
argued together: grounds 1,2 and 3 were also argued together; and grounds
5, 8 and 9 were also argued together. Ground 10 was argued alone. I shall
deal with them in that order.
Grounds 4, 6, and 7 are worded thus:
   "4. The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact
       when they affirmed the Trial Judge's decision allowing the
       respondent to succeed on a case that the respondent had not pleaded
       and proved.
The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact when they
allowed the Trial Judge's decision overturning the election based on mere
inferences and not facts.
The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact when they
affirmed the Trial Judge's declaration that the Appellant's certificates
were fake, forgeries, unauthentic and nullity".
In arguing these grounds, learned counsel submitted that the trial court
had allowed the respondent to depart from his pleadings and adduced
evidence to support a case that he had not pleaded. He argued that the
court in its judgment departed from the respondent's case which was that
the appellant had not been validly nominated and that the election should
be set aside, the NCHE be found to have failed in its duty to determine
whether the appellant was qualified, and that he, the respondent as runner-
up should be declared winner of the election. Instead, he argued, the court
wrongly decided the case on the basis of the authenticity of the Police
certificate and the duration of the Police courses. Counsel further argued
that the trial Judge had further departed from the case by treating it as
if it was an application to review the NCHE decision to issue the appellant
with the certificate of A-level equivalent. He contended that the court
should not have found that the NCHE "acted unreasonably, in bad faith,
dishonestly, irrationally, not diligently" as none of these allegations had
been pleaded or proved. He argued that court had no jurisdiction to
intervene in the decision of NCHE, and to give orders which were not prayed
for in the Petition He cited the case of ORIENTAL BROKERS LTD -Vs-
TRANSOCEAN (U) LTD, SCCA NO. 55 OF 1995 (unreported) as authority for the
proposition that a trial judge cannot introduce new issues while writing a
judgment and decide a case on the basis of those issues without being
addressed on those issues by the parties. Counsel further contended that
the lower courts erred when they found fraud without specifying who had
carried it out, when they found that the certificates were fake, forgeries
and a nullity and not genuine. He submitted that there was no basis for
this finding since there was no law on the signing or the mode of
certificates. In any case, he argued, this had to be specifically pleaded
and proved. It could not be presumed. He cited OKELLO - OKELLO -Vs- UNEB
(SCCA NO. 12/87) (unreported) to support his argument. Counsel submitted
that there was evidence showing that the certificates were properly signed
according to the established practices and therefore the findings were
based on mere inferences and speculations and not on facts Counsel
therefore, submitted that the Court of Appeal had erred in confirming the
decision of the trial court that the appellant had no qualifications to be
elected a Member of Parliament.

On the other hand Mr. Abdul Katuntu, Counsel for the respondent, in
opposition to the appeal, first argued grounds 1, 3, 6, 7 and 8 together
and fully supported the findings and decisions of the courts below. He
prefaced his argument by stating first that, ground one is the main ground
of appeal and by itself would dispose of the appeal whichever way the Court
decided. He contended ground 3 was irrelevant because it complained about a
finding against the NCHE which was a party in the original suit, but not
party to the appeal.

Counsel argued grounds 1, 3, 6, 7 and 8 together since, in his view, they
were all related to the question of the qualifications of the appellant and
were similar to issues 1, 2 and 3 which were agreed by both parties and
framed for determination at the trial. Counsel contended further that the
qualifications or non-qualification of the appellant was found as a fact by
the trial Court and affirmed by the Court of Appeal. The Court found that
the appellant had no qualifications at the time of nomination and therefore
his nomination was null and void. Counsel urged this Court to uphold the
concurrent finding of fact by the two lower Courts Counsel argued that the
appellant had no A-Level certificate and had been nominated on the basis of
the certificate of equivalency issued to him by NCHE which in turn was
based on the certificates presented to it by the appellant from the Uganda
Police Force. Regarding the argument by counsel for the appellant that the
appellant did not know the case he had to answer, Counsel pointed out that
the appellant had clearly tried in his affidavit in answer to the petition
to explain his qualifications in paragraphs 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10 thereof. The
respondent adduced evidence to show that the appellant did not have the
requisite qualifications. In his view, the authorities cited by counsel for
the appellant were distinguishable from the facts of this case. Learned
counsel submitted that the courts below based their decisions on facts but
not on inferences and suppositions as argued by the appellant. He submitted
that court had carefully perused the certificates that were presented at
the trial by the appellant himself and considered the contradictions in the
evidence of the appellant. Counsel gave the example, of an affidavit sworn
on 20th May 1996 by the appellant whereby he had stated that after
attending Police training he had been given a certificate in Law but that
it had got lost. Later, in another affidavit he claimed that that claim of
a certificate in law was a mistake and he had never had such certificate.
The certificates he produced were in fact issued in 2001. Counsel submitted
that Court was right to treat the appellant as an unreliable witness given
the lies and contradictions in his evidence. Counsel further submitted that
the lower courts were right to reject the evidence of Twaruhukwa the Police
Officer who had earlier written a letter to say that the persons who had
signed on the certificates of the appellant had not been authorized
officers, only to attempt to change this in his evidence in Court. In his
view court was correct to conclude that the officer was misleading the
court.

As I pointed out earlier, I intend to deal with the grounds in the order
they were argued by counsel for the appellant. This is because the grounds
and submissions thereon overlap and are quite intertwined. The contention
in the 4th ground is that the two courts below allowed the respondent to
succeed on a case he had not pleaded and proved I would point out that an
appeal to this Court should be based on objections to the decision of the
Court of Appeal. The objection raised in ground 4 was not raised in, and
decided by, the Court of Appeal.

Be that as it may, it is clear from the petition that the respondent's case
was "that the said Balingirira Abdul Nakendo was at the time of his
election not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament." The
petition sought declarations, inter alia, that the respondent "was not
validly nominated and could not therefore participate in the election." It
prayed that the election of the appellant "be set aside as having been null
and void." I am of the view that the respondent's case was sufficiently
pleaded. The appellant responded to it. Both parties called evidence on it
upon which the court based its decision. Accordingly I find no merit in
ground 4 and it must fail.

Ground 6 alleges that the trial court's decision to overturn the election
was based on mere inferences and not facts, whereas Ground 7 alleges that
the trial Judge was wrong to declare that the appellant's certificates were
fake, forgeries, unauthentic and nullity. Both grounds accuse the Court of
Appeal of error in affirming these findings and decisions of the trial
court.

The respondent in his affidavit supporting the petition alleged a number of
anomalies in the certificates that the appellant presented to the NCHE,
which, in his view, showed that the appellant did not have the
qualifications. The wording of the certificate of equivalency issued by
NCHE leaves no doubt that it was issued on the basis of the certificates
proffered by the appellant.

It states:-
      "I certify that NAKENDO, A.B. who was born on the 24/06/1946, has
      satisfied the National Council for Higher Education that he has
      completed formal education of advanced level standard or its
      equivalent, in that he holds the following qualification/s:

      Certificate in Special Branch Course, Special Branch Training School
      Nairobi Police Training School, 1971.
Certificate in Basic Police Training, Kibuli Training School, 1970., East
      African Certificate of Education EAEC, 1968". (emphasis added).
   There must be a basic presumption here that the above certificates must
   be genuine, and duly issued by the bodies named therein. If it were
   proved that those certificates upon which NCHE based its decision to
   issue its own certificate were not genuine, then it would follow that the
   NCHE Certificate would be a nullity as the person would not have the
   necessary qualifications.
In the trial court, evidence was adduced both oral and by way of affidavit.
The certificates were subjected to close scrutiny, as was the oral
evidence. The first point to note was that the certificate in Special
Branch Course, Special Branch Training School Nairobi, 1971, was actually
not issued by that school, but by the Kibuli Police Training School of the
Uganda Police Force. There were material contradictions in the evidence of
the witness Twaruhukwa who testified as to whether the certificates
purportedly issued by the Uganda Police Force were signed by authorized
officers. Earlier, in answer to a firm of lawyers concerning the genuiness
of the certificates purportedly issued by the Uganda Police Force, this
same officer had written a letter (exhibit X) in which he stated:-
           "Concerning the genuiness of the certificates of police
           training, it has been established that the officers indicated
           did not actually sign on the certificates, although the
           certificates bear their names. In other words no authorized
           person from the police signed the certificates."
Clearly this letter was saying the certificates were not authentic. Yet in
Court and under cross examination this same witness changed his story by
stating that in the police it is normal for officers to sign correspondence
for other named officers, and that his letter contained a mistake in that
he had missed out "un" before "authorised" so that the last sentence would
have read: "In other words no unauthorized person from the police signed
the certificates." Similarly another police officer NDYOMUGYENYI whose name
was actually printed on the certificates as a signatory but did not sign,
swore an affidavit to the effect that it was normal for other officers to
sign "for" other officers. He was silent as to why he himself and the other
named officer ODORA did not sign, nor could he name the officer who had
signed for him. All that appears on the certificates are illegible
scribbled signatures by undisclosed persons

The learned trial judge considered the evidence of these two officers and
found it useless and only meant to mislead the court. He considered at
length Police Standing Orders (chapter 8 paragraph 15) under which these
two officers claimed that the certificates could be signed "for" other
named officers. He states in his judgment:
           "I have read the standing orders. The side note to paragraph 15
           of chapter 8 is stated as "signatures on letters" and the
           paragraph states in full:
"115 (a) Officers acting on behalf of Unit Commanders will sign letters
"for" the Unit Commander, and not over their own designations.


                 (b) In order to avoid inconveniences to the public and
                 other officers by the illegibility of signatures, the
                 officers will print or have their names typed below their
                 signatures".

                 First I am not persuaded that the above paragraph of the
                 standing orders is relevant to the issuance of documents
                 such as certificates as evidence of academic qualification.
                 It deals with letters emanating from unit commanders. In
                 fact paragraph 1 to 20 of chapter 8 of the Standing Orders
                 are under the sub-heading titled "CORRESPONDENCE."

                 But even if the above paragraph is found to be applicable
                 to signing certificates, then there was clear violation of
                 sub-paragraph (b) which requires the officers signing "for"
                 the unit Commander to print or have their names typed below
                 their signatures. If this had been done one would not be
                 talking of anonymous signatures. It would have been
                 possible to determine whether the signatories were officers
                 authorized to sign on behalf of their unit commanders, in
                 this case the Course Director and Director of Training."
The learned trial Judge found these witnesses unreliable and misleading to
the court. He also did not believe the evidence given by one Birungi from
the NCHE. The Court of Appeal having considered the same evidence on
record, agreed with the findings of the trial judge that the certificates
upon which the NCHE acted to issue a certificate of equivalency were not
genuine. As learned counsel for the respondent submitted, these were
findings of fact by the lower courts and this court can only interfere with
those findings on exceptional circumstances.

The Court of Appeal in the lead judgment of Mpagi Bahigeine, JA, had this
to say after examining the evidence on record; "There is no doubt that both
certificates do tell blatant lies about themselves. Mr. Mubiru, simply
glossed over these apparent crucial anomalies. The learned Judge was
correct in his appraisal of the evidence."

Having considered the written submissions of counsel for the appellant, the
oral submissions by counsel for the respondent, the oral reply by counsel
for the appellant, and the evidence on record, I am unable to find fault
with the concurrent findings of fact by both the High Court and the Court
of Appeal in this matter. The courts were justified to find that the
certificates upon which NCHE acted to issue the certificate of equivalency
were in fact no certificates at all. Therefore, grounds 6 and 7 must fail.

Grounds 1, 2 and 3 which counsel for appellant also argued together are
worded thus;

    "1. The Learned Justices of Court of Appeal erred in law and fact when
          they affirmed the Trial Judge's declaration that the appellant had
          no qualifications to be nominated to stand as a Member of
          Parliament.

The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact when they
affirmed the Trial Judge's decision to review the decision of the National
Council of Higher Education.


The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact when they
affirmed the Trial Judge's decision that the National Council of Higher
Education acted unreasonably, dishonestly and in bad faith in issuing a
certificate of equivalence, without properly evaluating all the evidence
that was before the National Council of Higher Education before it issued
the certificate of equivalence."
In respect of ground one, counsel argued that in so far as the appellant
had been issued with the certificate of A-Level equivalence by NCHE and he
had been duly nominated on that basis, the Court could not then find that
the appellant was not qualified at the time of his nomination. To him, The
Parliamentary Elections Act, (PEA) Section 63(4) and (b) is concerned only
with qualification at the time of election not at the time of nomination.
He cited PHILIP KATABALWA -Vs- NTEGE, ELECTION PETITION NO. 11 OF 1998 in
support of his argument.

In his view, article 80 of the Constitution and Section 4(1) ( c) of the
Parliamentary Election Act only refer to the completion of education not
the attainment of certificates. To him, Section 61(1) (d), of PEA refers to
the certificate of equivalency so that once a person has been issued with
one, his election cannot be set aside under that section. One can only move
to challenge it under section 4(11) of PEA, or if it is forged, under
section 5 of PEA. Since the certificate of equivalence issued by NCHE had
not been quashed, it could not be found by the court that the appellant had
not been qualified at the time of his nomination. This, according to
counsel, was a misdirection on the part of the lower courts. The NCHE was
an administrative body with powers to issue the certificate it did. Unless
it was quashed by way of certiorari or appeal, the court could not simply
quash it by mere declaration. Counsel cited HARRY WHITMORE & MARONSON in
REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION to support his submission.

Counsel submitted that therefore, since the respondent had filed his case
merely seeking declarations and had not sought certiorari or appeal against
the decision of NCHE, the certificate of equivalence had to stand and
therefore the Appellant was duly nominated. He concluded that the orders
given by the lower courts setting aside the election were erroneous and
invited this Court to set them aside.

In respect of grounds 2 and 3, counsel while reiterating his arguments
under ground one submitted that since NCHE as an administrative body had
made its decision, court could not subject that decision to review without
following the proper law and procedure, irrespective of whether there was
error in the decision or not. Counsel contended that the grounds upon which
a court may review the decision of an administrative body were not followed
in this case. He attacked the lower courts for questioning the weight
attached to the two certificates issued by the Uganda Police Force by NCHE
while refusing to take into account the evidence considered by NCHE and
upon which it issued the certificate of equivalence. He asserts that the
lower courts misdirected themselves to have found that the NCHE acted
without reasonableness, good faith or honesty in awarding the certificate
to the appellant.

As already noted, counsel for the respondent in his omnibus response,
submitted that ground one of the appeal by itself would dispose of the
appeal whichever way court decided. He was of the view that ground 3 was
irrelevant since it complained against a finding on the part of NCHE which
had not appealed against that finding and was not party to the present
appeal. In his view this was a proxy appeal" which should not be allowed.

In answer to the contention by counsel for the appellant that court could
not interfere with decisions of statutory administrative bodies, counsel
contended that a court of law has a right to interfere with decisions of
statutory bodies if those decisions are irrational. In this case, both
courts were correct to find that the certificates that the appellant
presented to NCHE were not genuine and therefore null and void. Counsel
further argued that issues of certiorari did not arise as this was an
election petition governed by the election laws. Court was empowered by the
Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Act to inquire into and
declare whether a person had been duly qualified when elected to
Parliament. He contended therefore that those grounds of appeal based on
the procedure for review of decisions of administrative bodies were
irrelevant to this appeal.

When considering grounds 4, 6, and 7 I considered some aspects of the
arguments raised here. In my view in considering the above grounds of
appeal it becomes necessary to examine the law with regard to Parliamentary
Election Petitions and the powers of the courts thereunder. Article 80 of
the Constitution sets out the qualifications and disqualifications of
members of Parliament. Article 80 (1)( c) states: "A person is qualified to
be a member of Parliament if that person has completed a minimum formal
education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent which shall be
established in a manner and at a time prescribed by Parliament by law."
Article 86(1) states: "The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and
determine any question whether a person has been validly elected a member
of Parliament or the seat of a member of Parliament has become vacant"
(emphasis added) Article 86(2) provides for a right of appeal to the Court
of Appeal for any one dissatisfied with the decision of the High Court. The
Parliamentary Elections Act provides in section 60(1) that a Petition
challenging an election shall be filed in the High Court and also sets out
the grounds for setting aside a Parliamentary Election. This section 61(1)
(d) states: "The election of a candidate as a Member of Parliament shall
only be set aside on any of the following grounds if proved to the
satisfaction of the court:-
That the candidate was at the time of his or her election not qualified for
election as a Member of Parliament."
It is to be noted that section 4(1)( c) of PEA which is in consonance with
the Constitution also states that a person must have completed a minimum
formal education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent in order to
qualify for election to Parliament.

On the basis of the above I think it is clear that the High Court had
jurisdiction to hear and determine the question as to whether the appellant
had qualifications to be elected a Member of Parliament. Counsel for the
appellant argued that once a person has been issued with the certificate of
equivalence by NCHE under subsections 5 and 6 of section 4, that person
becomes qualified for nomination as a member of parliament, and that
his/her nomination cannot be challenged except as provided for under
section 4(11) which states: "A person aggrieved by the grant or refusal to
grant a certificate by the National Council for Higher Education under this
section is entitled to appeal to the High Court against the decision and
the High Court may confirm, modify or reverse the decision."

According to counsel for the appellant, if no appeal was made in accordance
with the above provision, then the court can only interfere with the
decision of NCHE by way of certiorari or by review. Surely this must beg
the question as to what happens if a person is nominated on the basis of
the certificate of equivalency issued by NCHE and that person is
subsequently elected but it turns out that the certificates upon which the
equivalency had been based were forged or fraudulently obtained. Would the
High Court be deprived of jurisdiction to inquire into the question whether
such candidate had been qualified in the first place? One has to bear in
mind that the Constitution in Article 86 mandates the High Court to "hear
and determine any question whether a person has been validly elected a
member of parliament"

In my view, the court has power to hear and determine a petition where it
is alleged that a person was not qualified for election on the grounds that
the papers he presented in order to obtain a certificate of equivalence for
nomination purposes were not valid. The allegation, if proved to the
satisfaction of the court, would go to the very root of the process leading
to his nomination and subsequent election. It is a legitimate question that
the Court must inquire into. It would not require proceedings for
certiorari. It is an election matter and the court has jurisdiction to hear
and determine it. If the High Court finds on evidence that the decisions of
an administrative body, like NCHE, were irrationally made or were not based
on proper diligence, the Court can, and should, so declare. In my view, the
NCHE certificate of equivalence is not the qualification for election to
parliament. It is meant to be evidence but not conclusive evidence of the
qualification set out in the Constitution. It is therefore subject to
court's evaluation or scrutiny. In this case the Court of Appeal considered
the law and counsel's argument that a certificate issued by the NCHE can
only be challenged under section 4(ll) of the Parliamentary Elections Act.
The court rejected that argument. In her lead judgment in which the other
Justices concurred, Mpagi Bahigeine, JA states:
           "The wording of this subsection does not in any way connote a
           mandatory procedure as Mr. Mubiru did suggest. It does not bar
           access to the High Court by way of a petition. All the
           provisions cited by Mr. Mubiru, Section 4(1) and (2) highlight
           the requisite qualifications and disqualification of an aspirant
           for election. Section 61(1) (d) cites one ground for setting
           aside an election i.e. when the candidate was at the time of his
           or her election not qualified or was disqualified for election
           as a member of Parliament. I would therefore not hesitate to
           endorse the learned Judge's holding that Section 4(11) does not
           extinguish appellant's right to petition the High Court. I would
           also agree with the learned Judge that proceeding immediately by
           way of appeal would have saved a lot of time and costs. I would
           however dismiss this ground of appeal."
I agree with the position of the Court of Appeal. Therefore grounds 1, 2
and 3 fail.
Grounds 5, 8, and 9 were worded thus:
   "5. The Learned Justices of Court of Appeal erred in law when they
        affirmed the Trial Judge's decision of putting the burden of proof
        on the appellant.
The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact when they
decided that there was nothing on the basis of which the certificate of
equivalence to A-level could have been issued.


The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law and fact when they
failed to find that the Trial Judge did not properly and judiciously
evaluate the evidence before court."

In respect of ground 5, counsel argued that the lower courts shifted the
burden of proof from the respondent. He is the one who had to prove that
the decision of NCHE was not ultra vires. In his view, in election
petitions the burden lies on the petitioner to prove his case. He cited a
number of authorities for his view. To him, the appellant should not have
been found to have failed to prove that he had acceptable post O-Level
qualifications or who the persons who signed the two Uganda Police Force
certificates were, or why he did not go to Nairobi to get a document in
proof of his attendance of the course. All these should have been proved by
the respondent.

As for grounds 8 and 9, counsel contended that the Court of Appeal erred in
declaring that there was nothing on the basis of which the certificate of
equivalency was issued by NCHE since it did not have all the evidence that
had been available to NCHE. Court should have left that issue to the
experts, which it did not do. To him, therefore, the Court of Appeal failed
to properly re-evaluate the evidence on record.

In his submissions in reply, counsel for the respondent did not touch on
the issue of burden of proof raised in ground 5. But as already noted he
supported the finding of the Court of Appeal that the trial court was
correct in holding that there was no basis upon which the certificate of
equivalence to "A-level" could have been issued. In his view the Court of
Appeal, after reviewing the evidence on record, was correct to find that
the trial court had properly evaluated the evidence before the court.

With due respect to counsel for the appellant ground 5 is a matter that was
not raised in the Court of Appeal and was not decided on by that court.
Be that as it may I will briefly consider it. In my view the import of
Article 80 of the Constitution is that the duty to produce valid
certificates to the electoral authorities lies with the intending candidate
for election.. Where the authenticity of those certificates is questioned,
it can only be his burden to show that he has authentic certificates. In
this case the appellant indeed tried by both oral and affidavit evidence to
prove the authenticity of his certificates, but failed. In my view the
question of shifting the burden of proving those certificates does not
arise.

In my consideration and conclusion on grounds 4, 6 and 7, I covered grounds
8 and 9. There was ample evidence to support the finding of the trial
judge, that the NCHE were not "guided by considerations of reasonableness,
good faith, honesty and diligence". Penny Birungi and the documents
exhibited provided such evidence. Surely the NCHE could, and ought to have
ascertained whether the certificates they were considering were duly signed
by authorised officers.

It is inconceivable that the NCHE could accept certificates that were not
signed by both or any of the officers stated on the certificates and that
did not indicate the date of issue. In the case of the Special Branch
Course allegedly done in Kenya, NCHE accepted a certificate signed by
unnamed persons from the Uganda Police Force when the course had not been
offered by the Uganda Police itself. The argument by counsel for the
appellant that Nairobi was merely a venue as you would have a function take
place at a hotel, is speculative and untenable. The more likely practice is
that the Special Branch Training School in Nairobi would have issued its
certificates to persons who would have attended its course. The relevant
authorities in the countries of origin of the course participants would
then equate those certificates to their own standards. This would be the
situation anticipated by Section 4(5)(b) of the PEA, i.e., recognition of
qualifications obtained outside Uganda.

In my view, the Court of Appeal was justified in confirming the decisions
of the trial court that the certificates considered by the NCHE were no
certificates at all, and that the NCHE had acted unreasonably and without
due diligence. I see no reason to interfere with its finding and decision
on this matter. Therefore, grounds 8 and 9 must fail.

Ground 10 was worded thus:-
The Learned Justices of the Court of Appeal erred in law when they affirmed
the Trial Judge's declaration that the Appellant pays costs of the petition
to the respondent.
With regard to this ground, the appellant's Counsel argued that since this
is an Election Petition and a matter of public interest, no costs should be
awarded. He however contradicted himself by asking for costs to be awarded.
On the other hand counsel for the respondent while pointing out the
contradiction in the appellant's counsel's submissions, prayed for costs. I
am of the view that, although these are matters of public interest,
nonetheless parties do incur costs. The award of costs is a matter of
court's discretion and I would not interfere except where it is exercised
unjudicially which is not the case here.

In the result I dismiss this appeal with costs to the respondent in this
court and in the courts below.

DATED at Mengo this 22nd day of January 2008


B.M. KATUREEBE
JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT


JUDGMENT OF ODOKI, CJ

I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgement prepared by my
learned brother Katureebe JSC, and I agree with it and the orders he has
proposed.

As the other members of the Court also agree, this appeal is dismissed with
costs here and in the Courts below.

Dated at Mengo this 22nd day of January 2008


B J Odoki
CHIEF JUSTICE

                          JUDGMENT OF TSEKOOKO, JSC

I have had the benefit of reading in advance the judgement prepared by my
learned brother, the Hon. Mr. Justice Katureebe, JSC., and I agree with his
conclusions that the appeal has no merit and should be dismissed with costs
here and in the Courts below.

Delivered at Mengo this 22nd day of January 2008.



J. W. N. TSEKOOKO
JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT.


JUDGMENT OF MULENGA, JSC


I had the benefit of reading in draft the judgment prepared by my learned
brother Katureebe,
JSC. I agree that the appeal is without merit. It ought to be dismissed
with costs to the
respondent.

Dated at Mengo this 22nd day of January 2008

J.N Mulenga
JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT


                        JUDGMENT OF KANYEIHAMBA, JSC.

I have had the benefit of reading in draft the judgment prepared by my
learned brother, Hon. Justice Katureebe, J.S.C. and I agree with his
conclusions that the appeal has no merit and should be dismissed with costs
here and in the courts below.

Dated at Mengo, this 22nd day of January 2008

                              G.W. KANYEIHAMBA
JUSTICE OF SUPREME COURT
43

