{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA \
\
IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA HOLDEN AT KAMPALA\
\
COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION\
\
HCT-00-CC-CS-0240-2004\
\
Busoga Growers Cooperative Union Ltd                                      Plaintiff\
\
Versus\
\
Non-Performing Assets Recovery Trust                                       Defendant\
\
Legislation referred to:\
Non-Performing Assets Recovery Act, Chapter 95, Laws of Uganda 2000 Rev. Ed\
\
Cases cited:\
NPART v West Nile Distilling Co. Ltd, tribunal case no. 28 of 1996 \
Paul J Erongot v NPART tribunal case no. 17 of 1996\
\
\
BEFORE: THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE FMS EGONDA-NTENDE\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 FACTS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 he plaintiff had loan accounts with the Uganda Commercial Bank. The balance of one such account, being Shs.49,383,580.00 as at 31/12/1995, was assigned to the defendant, a statutory body, established under the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Act, Chapter 95, Laws of Uganda 2000 Rev. Ed., on the 7/03/1996. This assignment was in writing. The loan originally granted to the plaintiff in respect of this matter arises was used for the purchase of certain goods, some of which, were eventually retained by Uganda Commercial Bank, and were never released to the plaintiff.\
The plaintiff after the assignment referred to above entered into an arrangement with the defendant whereby it paid to the defendant the assigned sum together with interest, less certain sums waived off, totalling to Shs.146,490,444.00. The plaintiff now brings this action seeking to recover from the defendant the said sums plus other sums on the ground that the defendant falsely represented to the plaintiff that the sum assigned was shs.146,496,444.00, whereas not. \
\
ISSUES\
 how much money did the plaintiff pay to the defendant? \
if this amount is higher than the sum assigned, whether the defendant was entitled to receive more amounts than was assigned. \
if the defendant was not so entitled, whether the plaintiff would be entitled to receive it back with interest.\

\b \
HELD\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Court held that the defendants act of collecting more than the assigned sum was illegal and thus the defendant was ordered to refund back certain sums of money with interest to the plaintiff
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 \ul \ulc0 \
}