{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl360\slmult1\qj

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Deborah Namutebi and Administrator General V Kawempe Division.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl360\slmult1\qj

\b0 \cf0 The plaintiffs brought this action to recover arrears of agreed rent, at the rate of shs. 2,000,000.00 per month, totalling to Shs. 111,638,200.00, interest, general damages, and costs from the defendant, who had been managing the market, on land of the plaintiff, its registered proprietor since 1\super st\nosupersub  October 1999 when the defendant assumed direct control of the market. On 1\super st\nosupersub  October 1999 the defendant took over the management of Kizito Market which is on land owned by the estate of late Stanley Kizza Kizito. The defendant was supposed to make monthly remittances from October 1999.
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl360\slmult1\sa160\ql\qnatural

\b0 \cf0 Court: This suit was filed on 11\super th\nosupersub  January 2005. The plaintiffs are entitled to bring forth a claim only for the period that is not in excess of three years up to 11\super th\nosupersub  January 2005. This would mean the claim that is earlier than 11th January 2002 is affected by limitation and cannot be maintained. It is struck out. That the defendant was to pay shs.2, 000,000.00 per month. Allowed arrears of rent of shs.72, 000,000.00 for 36 months up to the date this suit was filed, to the plaintiff to be paid by the defendant, less what has been admitted herein to be owing by the defendant, on account of rent. This money shall attract interest at the rate of 20% per cent annum from the date of filing this suit up to the date of judgement and thereafter at court rate from date of judgment till realisation in full. An award for general damages of shs10, 000,000.00 is granted to the plaintiff together with costs of the suit.}