{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA 
\f1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0 (COMMERCIAL DIVISION) 
\f1 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0 HCT-00-CV-CS- 1293 OF 1997\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 ISAAC GOERGE MUNAABI PLAINTIFF\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 VERSUS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 ALBERT SEBUDDE DEFENDANTS
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 RACHEL KAGGWA\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 FACTS\
\
In November 1996 the Defendant No.1 lent to the Plaintiff Shs2, 000,000.00 (shillings two million) repayable with interest of shs600, 000.00 in one month\'92s time. As security for the loan the Plaintiff deposited with Defendant No.1 documents, namely, the certificate of title for the suit property and blank transfer forms duly signed by him. The Plaintiff paid back Shs600, 000.00 and defaulted in respect of the balance. The Defendant No.1 using the blank transfer forms transferred the property into his names. And on the same day transferred the suit property into the names of Defendant No.2.\
\
ISSUES\
\
Whether the transfer of the suit property into the name of Defendant No.1 was proper and lawful-\
Whether the transfer from Defendant No.1 to Defendant No.2 was fraudulent;-\
What are the remedies available if any.\
\
HELD\
\
The transfer was done fraudulently with constructive notice of defendant no.2 through his agent. \
A sum of Shs3, 000,000.00 will be adequate to compensate the plaintiff as general damages for inconvenience. It is just and equitable in the circumstances to direct the Plaintiff to pay back the said sum of shs2, 000,000.00. It may be offset from the money ordered to be paid by the Defendant No.1 the Plaintiff as general damages. In which event only Shs1, 000,000.00 would remain due to the Plaintiff on that account. \
Defendant No.2 is directed within 30 days from the date hereof to return the duplicate of certificate of title to the suit property to this court for delivery to the Registrar of Titles.\
The Plaintiff is awarded costs of the suit together with interest at court rate on the decretal amount from date of judgment until payment in full against both Defendants.\
\
}