{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 IN THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA\
IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA\
COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION\
\
MISC. APPL. NO. 73 OF 2007\
(Arising from HCT-00-CC-CS-1026-2004)\
\
THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT\'85..\'85\'85 APPLICANT\
\
VERSUS\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 BLESSED CONSTRUCTORS LTD.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 JINJA DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT \'85RESPONDENTS\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Legislation referred to:\

\b0 \ulnone Civil Procedure Rules\
Civil Procedure Act\
Inspectorate of Government Act, Act 5/2002\
\

\b \ul Cases cited:\

\b0 \ulnone Kololo Curing Co Ltd Vs West Mengo Co-op Union Ltd (1891) HCB 60\
Gokoldas Laximidas Tanna Vs  Sorter Rose  Munyinza H.C.C. S. No. 7076 of 1987 (1990 \'96 91) KALR 21
\i0   
\i \
Dollfus Mieg Vs  Bank of England (1951)  Ch 33 and Amon Vs Raphael Truck and Sons Ltd (1956) 1 QB 357)\'94\
DAPCB Vs. Jaffer Brother Ltd SCCA No. 9 of 1998, Aomor Rapheal Vs. Tuch & Sons Ltd [1956] 1 All ER 273. \
Edward Kabugo Sentongo Vs Dr. George Asaba HCT-00-CC-MA-0238 of 2006, \
Denis Kimuli Bahemuha Vs Sarah Bimbona Anywar & Anor (1987) HCB 71
\i0 .
\i \
Inspector General of Government Vs Kikonda Butema Farm Ltd and AG C.A.  Constitutional Application  No 13 of 2006
\i0 ,
\i \
\pard\pardeftab720\li360\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
BEFORE:  JUSTICE LAMECK N. MUKASA\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 FACTS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qj\pardirnatural
\cf0  Blessed Constructions Ltd, is claiming against the second Respondent, Jinja District Local Government, for payment of shs93, 115,000/= for Construction work done on the 2\super nd\nosupersub  Respondent\'92s instructions by the first Respondent in various schools under the 2\super nd\nosupersub  Respondent\'92s administration and for general and exemplary damages for breach of contract and costs of the suit.  In the plaint the first Respondent claims that the value of the work completed at the various school sites was in the region of shs93, 115,000/=.  That while the first Respondent was proceeding with the work, it was instructed by the 2\super nd\nosupersub  Respondent to stop the work which the 1\super st\nosupersub  Respondent contends was in breach of the contract.  Thus the suit.\
This is an application by the  Inspectorate  of Government to be joined as 2nd defendant to the above suit\
\
ISSUES\
-whether the IGG could be added as defendants to the suit\
\
HELD\
Court was of the view that the applicant could be added as defendant to the main suit since his interests were akin to those of the defendant thus allowed the application with each party bearing its own costs}