{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl360\slmult1\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Shri chander Mohan & Kapoor British Herbal Cosmetic
\b0  V 
\b Amin Chavania T/a Jaskar Enterprises
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl360\slmult1\sa120\ql\qnatural

\fs22 \cf0 This is an appeal from the ruling of the learned Assistant Registrar of Trademarks.
\fs24  The Appellant had sought inter alia to expunge the said mark from the Register of Trademarks. The Respondents on the 24\super th\nosupersub  March, 2004 filed an application to register the mark Eldena as cosmetics under part A class 3 of the Trade Mark Act.  The mark was advertised in the Uganda Gazette on the 19\super th\nosupersub  March 2004.  A company called M/s Euro Kent then wrote to the Registrar expressing their intention to oppose the registration of the mark but did not formally pursue the matter as required by the Act.  The mark was then registered on the 28\super th\nosupersub  July 2004.\
The application was found on alternative error and fraud.\
Held: The Appellant\'92s client could rely on the claim of fraud and in fact did give the necessary particulars of the said fraud in the various statutory declarations. The licence as an exhibit came after the actual hearing contrary to rule 53.  The mark be registered a fresh so that the proprietor and in particular the manufacturer of products 
\i \'93Eldena\'94
\i0  be allowed to register the said mark. The register with respect to trade mark No. 26496 
\i \'93Eldena\'94
\i0  be rectified by canceling the present registration but allowing its re-registration by its proprietor who is the manufacturer i.e. M/S British Herbal Cosmetics.\
}