{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 REPUBLIC OF UGANDA\
\
IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA HOLDEN AT KAMPALA\
\
COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION\
\
HCT-00-CC-CA-0013-2006\
\
L\'92OREAL                                                                                    APPELLANTS\
UNILEVER PLC\
\
Versus\
\
INTERCONSUMER PRODUCTS LTD                                     RESPONDENT\
\
Legislation referred to:\
Trademark Rules\
Trademark Act.                                                                         \
\
\
BEFORE: THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE FMS EGONDA-NTENDE\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 FACTS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 The respondent applied to the Registrar of Trademarks for registration of two trademarks, SMOOTH & LOVELY, under no.28097 and NICE and LOVELY under no. 28192 on or about the 4\super th\nosupersub  October 2005. The application was advertised in the Uganda Gazette, and the appellants commenced opposition proceedings to the same. \
The respondent in due course filed counter statements which were served on the appellants. The appellants applied for extension of time to enable them gather all necessary evidence to file the required statutory declarations. The Registrar, without assigning any reason, did not respond to the appellants\'92 applications, but on application of the respondent, set aside the opposition proceedings and granted registration of the trademarks applied for. The Registrar advised the appellants to appeal in case there are dissatisfied with the decisions he made. The appellants now appeal to this court.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
ISSUES\

\b0 whether the registar's decision and action were fair\
\
HELD\
Court held that the Registrar erred in rejecting or ignoring the opposition pleadings from the applicants in regard to the trademarks. Appeal was allowed and case reffered back to Registrar to hear the matter as law requires
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
}