{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
\b0 \

\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b (COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION) 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b HCT-00-CC- MA-0178 OF 2005
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b (Arising from HCT-00-CC-CS-0498-2002)
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b SEWANKAMBO DICKSON::::::::::::::::::::::: APPLICANT
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 VERSUS
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b ZIWA ABBY :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: RESPONDENT
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i \cf0 Application seeking a Court order to stay execution of Court\'92s Judgment pending the Applicant\'92s appeal to the Court of Appeal.-Contract-Hire-O.48, 0.39 rr 4 (2), (3) and 5 and 0.19 rr 23 (3) and 26 of the Civil Procedure Rules.-\

\b \ul Brief facts:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone The Applicant entered into an agreement with the Plaintiff for hire of the Respondent\'92s vehicle. Payment was to be on a daily basis. The initial agreement was for a definite period. However, there appears to have been mutual extension of the period of hire. The Respondent\'92s case is that the Applicant made a down payment of Shs.140, 000- (which under the agreement would only cover 2 days) and thereafter defaulted. The vehicle was later recovered from Arua where it had broken down. The Respondent\'92s claim was therefore basically for the outstanding hiring charges and the towing expense from Arua to Kampala.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Issues\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Whether substantial loss may result to the Applicant unless the order of stay is made;-whether the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and \
Whether security for costs has been given by the Applicant.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Held:
\i0\b0 \ulnone  \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 The Applicant satisfied the first requirement \
The second requirement is also in Applicant\'92s favour. \
A sum of Shs.5, 000,000- representing about one third of the decretal amount reasonable as security for costs.
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 \
}