{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
\b0 \

\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b (COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION) 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b HCT-00-CC-CS-0662 OF 2004
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b TARSIS B. KABWEGYERE:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: PLAINTIFF
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 VERSUS
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b SHEIKH ADAM SEMUGABE::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: DEFENDANT
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\i Recovery of Ug. Shs.20, 400,000- received by the Defendant from the Plaintiff and costs of the suit.-0.33 of the Civil Procedure Rules\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Brief facts:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Defendant was granted leave to defend the suit. He filed a defence through M/S Ngaruye Ruhindi, Spencer & Co. Advocates of Mbarara. In May 2005, there was an attempt to serve the Defendant through his lawyers. They wrote back to say that they no longer had instructions in the matter. An attempt to serve him personally was fruitless. The Court made an order for substituted service. Still he did not appear. The Plaintiff was accordingly allowed to state his claim and prove it in the absence of the Defendant.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Issues:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Whether the Plaintiff is entitled to the remedies sought.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Held:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Judgment entered for the Plaintiff against the Defendant to\
 i. Refund to the Plaintiff a sum of Shs.20, 400,000- (Twenty million four hundred thousand).
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 ii. Pay interest on the decretal sum at the rate of 25% per annum from the date of Judgment till payment in full.\
\
iii. Pay costs of the suit.
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\i\b \ul \ulc0 \
}