{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Tahoma;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
\b0 \

\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b (COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION) 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b HCT-00-CC-CS-0358 OF 2000
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b TRIAD HOLDINGS LIMITED::::::::::::::::::::: PLAINTIFF
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 VERSUS
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b 1. NETWORKS EXPORTS PVT LTD] 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b 2. SGS UGANDA LIMITED] 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b 3. SOCIETE GENERAL DE] 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b SURVEILENCE S.A. LTD]::::::::::::::::::: DEFENDANTS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b0 \cf0 Recovery of money lost in an importation transaction, special damages for breach of contract, interest and costs of the suit.-Point of law-Non-disclosure of a cause of action-Res judicata-0.7 r 11 (a) of the Civil Procedure Rules
\f1\i0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\i\b \ul Brief facts:
\f2\i0 \ulnone  \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b0 \cf0 The Plaintiff entered into a contract with the 1st Defendant to buy from the said 1st Defendant some rice of a stated description. It was claimed by the Plaintiff that it contracted the 2nd and 3rd Defendants to carry out the pre-shipment inspection of the goods which they did and they issued a clean report of findings. When the rice arrived in Kampala, it was declared unfit for human consumption and destroyed. The suit was in respect of that loss.
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Issues:
\f2\i0 \ulnone  \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b0 \cf0 Privity of contract.-\
Liability for the loss,\
 Whether contractual or tortious \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Held:
\i0\b0 \ulnone  \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Court found merit in the points of law raised by both learned counsel for the Defendants. They were sustained. Under 0.7 r 11 (a) of the Civil Procedure Rules, a plaint which discloses no cause of action must be rejected. Accordingly the plaint herein was rejected in accordance with the said 0.7 r 11 (a) and ordered it struck out with costs to the 2nd and 3rd Defendants. No order was made as  to the claim against the 1st Defendant.
\f1 \uc0\u8232 }