{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA\
\
IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA HOLDEN AT KAMPALA\
\
COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION\
\
HCT-00-CC-CS-0029-2005\

\b0 \
TROPICAL AFRICA BANK LTD                                              PLAINTIFF\
\
VERSUS\
\
C C JUUKO SSALONGO                                                          DEFENDANT\
\

\i\b \ul Legislation referred to:\

\b0 \ulnone Limitation Act,\
Civil Procedure Rules.\

\i0 \
\

\b \ul BEFORE: THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE FMS EGONDA-NTENDE\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 \ulc0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \ulnone FACTS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 The plaintiff is a commercial bank which on 10/06/1997 advanced an overdraft of Shs.55,000,000.00 with interest at 27% per annum  to Waswa & Co Ltd. The overdraft was for only 6 months. The defendant guaranteed this overdraft and mortgaged real property as security for the same. Waswa & Co. Ltd defaulted on payment. On 30\super th\nosupersub  September 1999 the plaintiff sold the mortgaged property and realised Shs.100,000,000.00. This sum was not enough to retire the loan. There was a balance of Shs.30,597,870.00  and as at the 31\super st\nosupersub  January 2003, the balance outstanding was Shs.81,805,916.00 which the plaintiff now seeks to recover from the defendant with interest at the rate of 27% per annum till payment in full, vide its amended plaint, filed on 30\super th\nosupersub  May 2007.\
\
ISSUES\
whether this suit was not time barred given the provisions of Section 18(5) of the Limitation Act, which barred actions recovering interest after the expiration of 6 years from when the interest became due.\
\
HELD\
Court dismissed the suit stating that it was time barred in as far as the sections of the Limitations ACT are concerned since 6 years from the due date had elapsed at the filing of this suit.}