{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA IN THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA CONSTITUTIONAL PETITION NO. 22 OF 2009\
\

\f1\b0\fs22\fsmilli11040 5	
\f0\b\fs24 1) UGANDA FREIGHT FORWARDERS ASSOCIATION 2) UGANDA CLEARING INDUSTRY AND	PETITIONERS FORWARDING ASSOCIATION\
\
-VS\
- 1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL	RESPONDENTS\

\f1\b0\fs22\fsmilli11040 10	
\f0\b\fs24 2) GREAT LAKES PORTS LTD\
\

\f1\b0\fs22\fsmilli11040 15	
\f0\b\fs24 CORAM:	HON. JUSTICE C.K.BYAMUGISHA, JA/CC HON. JUSTICE S.B.K.KAVUMA, JA/CC\
HON. JUSTICE A.S.NSHIMYE, JA/CC HON. JUSTICE M.S.ARACH AMOKO, JA/CC HON. JUSTICE REMMY KASULE, JA/CC\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 FACTS\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 This Constitutional petition was filed jointly by two petitioners, namely, the Uganda Freight Forwarders Association and the Uganda Clearing Industry and Forwarding Association (hereinafter referred to as the \'93petitioners\'94), on behalf of their members. They brought the petition under the 
\b Constitutional Court (Petitions and References) Rules, 2005. 
\b0 The object of the petition is to challenge the constitutionality of a contract dated 4
\fs16\fsmilli8040 th 
\fs24 March, 2009, which the\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1\fs22\fsmilli11040 \cf0 30	
\f0\fs24 Government of the Republic of Uganda entered into with the 2
\fs16\fsmilli8040 nd 
\fs24 respondent for the establishment and management of an Inland Dry Port at Tororo.\
\
ISSUES\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 Whether the petition is properly before Court.\
2. Whether the contract of 4
\fs16\fsmilli8040 th 
\fs24 March 2009 between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the 2
\fs16\fsmilli8040 nd 
\fs24 respondent created a monopoly in favour of the 2
\fs16\fsmilli8040 nd 
\fs24 respondent.\
3. Whether the act of entering into the said contract is inconsistent with and contravenes either all or any of articles 42, 43(1), 21(2), 22(1) and 26 (2) of the Constitution. \
4. Remedies if any.\
\
HELD\
-Court faulted the mode in which the petition was brought before the Court citing a lot of irregularities in the petitioners themselves\
-the suit was also demised with costs}