{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b (COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION) 
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b HCT-00-CC-CS-0530 OF 2004
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\b WERE FRED:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: PLAINTIFF
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\qc\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 VERSUS
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\b KAGA LIMITED::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: DEFENDANT
\f1\b0 \uc0\u8232 \u8232 
\f0\i Recovery of special damages, general damages, interest, exemplary damages and costs of the suit.-Contract-Breach of contract-Burden of proof-Nemo dat principle-S.22, 58 (2) of the Sale of Goods Act-Authority-Agency-\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Brief facts:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone The plaintiff claimed that he bought a vehicle from one Muyingo. The vehicle was in the names of the Defendant. He paid the full purchase price and took possession. His attempts to transfer it into his names failed because of the Defendant\'92s claim that Muyingo had no authority to sell it. The defence grounds it claim in the Nemo dat quod non habet rule.
\i \
\pard\pardeftab720\sb100\sa100\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \ul Issues:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Whether there was a contract of sale between the Plaintiff and the Defendant.-\
Whether the Defendant is in breach of the contract, if any.-\
Whether the Plaintiff is entitled to the remedies sought \
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Held:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 \ulnone Judgment entered for the Plaintiff against the Defendant in the following terms: 
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 a. Special damages: Ug. Shs.6, 752,000- (six million seven hundred fifty two thousand only).
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 b. General damages: Ug. Shs.1, 000,000- (one million only).
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 c. Interest on (a) and (b) at the rate of 30% p.a. from the date of Judgment till payment in full.
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 d. Costs of the suit.
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0 e. Interest on (d) at Court rate per annum from the date of taxation till payment in full.
\f1 \uc0\u8232 
\f0\i \ul \
}