{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri900\sl460\qc\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA\
IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA\
[COMMERCIAL COURT DIVISION]\
CIVIL SUIT NO. 597 OF 2006\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\

\b YOVANI TIBAKWANIKA=============PLAINTIFF\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qc\pardirnatural
\cf0 VERSUS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 HAJATI YUDAYA \
NALONGO NAMAGEMBE============DEFENDANT\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Legislation referred to:\

\b0 \ulnone Limitation Act.\
Civil Procedure Rules\
\

\b \ul Cases cited:\

\b0 \ulnone Francis Nansio Micheal \'96Vs- Nuwa Walakira [1993] VI KALR 14\
B.EA Triber Co. \'96VS- Inder Singh Gill [1979] EA 463\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\i0\b \cf0 BEFORE:	\ul HON. JUSTICE LAMECK N. MUKASA\ulnone \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 FACTS\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl460\qj\pardirnatural
\cf0  the Plaintiffs claim in the above Suit is that he instituted Civil Suit No. 513 of 1990 in the Mengo Chief Magistrate\'92s Court and obtained Judgment against the Defendant therein, one Juma Kabongo.  Following that Judgment the said Juma Kabongo ran out of Uganda and on the 6\super th\nosupersub  August 1992, the Defendant herein executed an agreement with M/S Rajsid Results Court Brokers and Bailiffs, the Court Bailiffs appointed to execute the decree in Civil suit Non GK 513 of 1990 whereby the Defendant agreed to pay the sum of Shs. 1,902,840/= to the said Court Bailiffs in discharge of the money the said Juma Kabogo was liable to pay under the said case.  The Defendant did not pay within the agreed period of four months.  As a result of the Defendants and failure to pay the Plaintiff and 3\super rd\nosupersub  October 2006 filed this suit seeking to recover:-\
Shs. 7,22,840/=, General damages and other issues\
\
ISSUES\
whether the suit was time barred \
whether the plaint disclosed cause of action against the defendant\
\
HELD\
-Court found that the suit was time barred as far as the Limitations Act\
-The plaintiff had also failed to prove a cause of action against the defendant in the plaint\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 \
}